>> Recent scientific discoveries
suggest a new approach
for managing inflammation.
Will it be effective at dealing
with an issue believed to be
at the root of all disease?
>> It's so important to look at
the body as a whole and go, OK,
I have inflammation but
where does it come from?
>> This is Gaia News.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Alzheimer's, cancer, diabetes,
heart disease, depression,
autoimmune disease--
these are just a few
of the conditions
in which inflammation is
known to play a major role.
Though a natural process to
rid the body of waste products,
when excessive,
inflammation can wreak havoc
on multiple systems.
In a new approach,
scientists suggest
they may have found a way to go
beyond current treatments that
seek to stop inflammation,
often without lasting effect.
The new research focuses on
targeting immune cells called
macrophages to help with
the cellular cleanup
necessary for inflammation
to fully resolve.
Dr. John Douillard is a leading
practitioner of ayurveda,
the ancient Indian system
of natural medicine
often called the
"mother of all healing."
>> Science shows--
which is great--
it says, we're going
to need to get in there
and help manipulate the
macrophages to clean up
the lymph in between
outside the cells.
Great idea.
But I would say let's do
that by going upstream
and treat the upstream cause
of that inflammation versus try
to put out the fire
with fire trucks
because sometimes
those fires are just
too big for the fire trucks.
>> Ayurveda has traced the
upstream issues causing
inflammation to
several key factors.
>> Information is a
double edged sword.
It happens in a natural way.
The body has a plan for that.
But it also can be excessive.
Amounts stems from the
isometric perspective
from a weak and broken
down digestive system.
So if you don't break your
proteins and your fats
down the way you should,
those proteins and fats
will go undigested into
your intestinal tract,
they'll be too big to get
into your blood and feed you,
according to the studies,
and find their way
into the lymphatic system, which
lines your intestinal tract.
It creates extra weight
around your belly,
it creates inflammation, and
an inflammation in the lymph.
Because remember
your lymph system
is trying to do
three basic things.
One, carry the trash out.
Number two, carry
your immune system.
And number three, carry
good, broken down fats
to every cell of your
body for baseline energy.
So inflammation is going to
cause fatigue and tiredness;
it can cause a
compromised immune system.
>> Another cause of inflammation
seen as pivotal by ayurveda has
to do with our
exposure to light.
>> We have a daylight
deficiency in our culture.
And getting out in the sun
is critically important
because that produces
antioxidants in our cells
that prevent inflammation.
So if you don't get outside,
you're going to be inflamed.
The best biggest mitigators
for oxidative stress
and inflammation is the sun.
70% of the sunlight
that we see outside
is called infrared light,
which penetrates our skin
several inches and
activates the production
of the energy in
the mitochondria,
but it also activates
a antioxidant.
And the name of that
antioxidant that is called
melatonin, but it's the number
one mitigator for inflammation.
>> What else besides getting
outside can we do to mitigate
inflammation?
>> One of the things that we all
know but don't maybe do as well
as we could is eating organic.
And organic foods are
important because when
you eat conventional foods
that have pesticides on it,
those pesticides kill the
microbes in your mouth
that make the enzymes that help
you digest the food properly
like wheat and dairy.
Processed foods have a
similar impact on the body.
Now, there's foods for
the lymphatic system.
Anything that is like
a berry or a cherry
or a beet or a
cranberry, anything
that would return your
beautiful white shirt or red
and stain it, is going to be an
antioxidant-based food that's
going to help support
lymphatic drainage
because the amounts would work
through your lymphatic system.
So those are good.
All the leafy green
and alkaline foods
are very good for your
lymphatic system as well.
Stress is a big
factor and techniques
like meditation and yoga
and breathing techniques
are all powerful stress
reduction techniques.
But the body was designed to
handle stress and mitigate
inflammation.
But when you have
nothing but stress
coming in and no
pulling back the bow
and becoming calm,
then we just--
I call it the eye
of the hurricane,
and that's the goal
of Ayurveda was
to learn how to live in
the eye of this storm.
And that is where
inflammation doesn't exist.
>> While Dr. Douillard
commends Western scientists
for their advances in
understanding the underlying
mechanisms of inflammation,
he believes that when it comes
to treating the root causes,
5,000 years of ayurvedic
science has gotten
it most right.
For a new perspective,
this is Gaia News.
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.